(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
So, let's implement counting sort.
Once again I've created a project,
I've got the code in package
academy.learnprogramming.countingsort.
And I'm going to write a method called countingSort.
So, I'll say public static void countingSort
and we're going to accept the input array
and the minimum value in the range
and the maximum value in the range.
Remember, that countingSort assumes
that all the values fall within the range min to max.
So, the first thing we're going to do
is to create the counting array,
the array that's going to keep track of the count,
so we'll say int countArray
and this array has to be large enough
to be able to count each possible value
and so, we're gonna say new int
and we want it to be max minus min plus one in length.
If our minimum is one, and our maximum is 10,
which is what we're going to pass in,
then we're going to create an array of length 10
minus one which is nine plus one which is 10
and that's what we want
because we have a possible 10 values,
one to 10 inclusive.
So, once we've created our countArray,
what do we wanna do?
We want to traverse our input array
and here's our input array up here,
it's not our usual array,
it's the aray that we went through in the slides.
And so, we're gonna traverse this array
and we're gonna count how many of each value we have.
And so, we're gonna say for int i equals zero,
i less than input.length,
i++ and we're gonna say countArray
and the way that we figure out
where each value is counted
is we say input i minus min.
That's going to be the index
of where to count each value.
So, for example, let's say input i
is equal to five,
so let's say we're at the point
where we're counting this one.
To figure out which element we should increment
in the countArray, we would say five minus one
because that's our minimum
and so, we'd increment count array four
because remember, we could have values let's say going
from 10 to 20
and in that case, the countArray would be 11 elements long
and so, we need to translate the values 10 to 20
to indices zero to 10
and that's what we're doing here
and we can do that just by subtracting out the minimum
from whatever value we're counting
and so, to count ones,
if we got a one, we'd subtract one minus one,
so we'd increment element zero.
If we got a two, two minus min is one
and so, we'd increment element one.
If we got a 10, 10 minus one is nine
and we'd increment element nine in the countArray.
And so, all this is doing
is translating the value we wanna count
into its index in the countArray.
And what do we wanna do?
We wanna increment that position
and so, that's all we do here.
So, this is the counting phase.
That's all it involves.
We go through each element in the array,
we look at the value,
we figure out where we're counting that value
in the countArray
and we increment that value by one.
So, once we've finished counting,
we now wanna write the values back into the input array,
so we're gonna say int j equals zero
and then for int i equals min,
i less than or equal to max.
I++.
So, what are we doing here?
J is the index we're going to use
to write to the input array.
And i is the index that we're going to use
to traverse the countArray.
We're setting i to min
and i less than or equal to max
because as you'll see,
because we're doing it this way,
we can just write the value of i back
to the input array on each iteration.
So, inside the loop, we're gonna say while countArray
i minus min
is greater than zero.
And you'll see why in a minute.
Let me write the rest of the code.
So, we'll say input j++ equals i
and countArray i minus min minus minus.
So, what's going on here?
What we're doing here
is remember that each element in the countArray
has a count and that count can be greater than one.
So, let's go through this for the number of twos
because we know we have two twos in our array
and the count of twos is kept in countArray one.
So, when i is two,
we say while countArray two minus one
which is countArray one is greater than zero,
we wanna keep writing twos to the input array
because at this point, we're writing the number of twos.
And so, the first thing we do
is we write a two
to the input array
and then we need to decrement the count.
We've already written one two
and so, we only have another two left to write
and so, we started with countArray one equals two
because we have two twos,
we write one of the twos to the input array
and then we decrement the count to one
because we only have one two remaining.
We loop around, countArray one is still greater than zero,
so we're gonna write another two
and then we're gonna decrement the count again
and at this point, the count will be zero
because we've written both of the twos
back to the input array
and so, when we loop back around,
at this point countArray one will be equal to zero
and we drop out of the loop
and then i will be incremented to three
and we enter this loop to write the number of threes
and once again, each time we write a three,
I don't believe we have any,
we do, one at the end, so each time we write a three,
the count will be decremented by one
until we've written all the threes
and then we'll loop around and we'll write the fours.
So, we've written the loop this way
starting i at min because then we can just
when we're writing out the number of ones,
i will be one,
when we're writing out the number of twos, i will be two.
So, we can just stick i in
and subtract here.
We could have started i at zero
but then we'd need to do a different type
of calculation here.
We'd need to figure out what value we're writing.
So, I think it's clear to set i to min
because then we know that on the first iteration
we're writing out one,
the second iteration we're writing the twos,
the third iteration we're writing the threes et cetera.
And of course j is keeping track
of where we are in the input array.
So, this is a fairly straightforward algorithm I would say.
If you're having trouble understanding it,
you can go and check the slides
but of course we wanna see if it works,
so let's call countingSort
and we'll call it with intArray,
our minimum value is one,
and our maximum value is 10,
so let's go ahead and run.
And here we go.
Two, two, three, four, five,
seven, eight, eight, nine and 10.
Exactly what we expect.
And so, that's countingSort
and once again, this algorithm
is only good to use under specific circumstances.
You only wanna use it when the range
of values is reasonable,
meaning it's not too large
and the dataset is a reasonable size as well.
So, ideally the number of unique values
or the range won't be significantly greater
than the number items you wanna sort.
So, as I said earlier,
if you have an array of length 10
and it can hold values from one to a million,
that's not a good candidate for counting sort
because you're gonna have to create a counting array
of length a million to sort 10 items
and obviously that wouldn't be a very good idea.
I'll see you in the next video.